[Docs] ES|QL Data Federation (#146945)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-data-federation-cluster-settings.md

Reviewer: I think this entire thing needs to be moved here as a new page called "Data federation settings": https://docs-v3-preview.elastic.dev/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/146945/reference/elasticsearch/configuration-reference

(and crosslinked if deeply desired)

Author: To be followed up in https://github.com/elastic/docs-content-internal/issues/1525

---
navigation_title: "Cluster settings"
description: "Reference for ES|QL Data Federation cluster settings. Tune object limits, control request concurrency, and adjust file discovery and caching."
applies_to:
  stack: preview =9.5
  serverless: unavailable
products:
  - id: elasticsearch
---

> 

Reviewer 2: The title is more action-oriented, but the content itself is all reference. I think we should at least tell users how to apply these settings. 

I think the best place to [point users is here](https://www.elastic.co/docs/deploy-manage/stack-settings) -- this is where we explain the differences between deployment types and also dynamic/static and node-level/cluster-level.

Author: Resolved in https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/commit/48b0b73a4a5d1d2a5af7a829bbb3963c0582f9b2

# Configure cluster settings for {{esql}} Data Federation

> The data sources feature adds the following cluster settings. All are node-scoped. The file-discovery limits and `esql.source.cache.enabled` are dynamic. The object-count limits and authentication gates are operator-managed. The remaining settings require a node restart.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The data sources feature adds the following cluster settings. All are node-scoped. The file-discovery limits and `esql.source.cache.enabled` are [dynamic](docs-content://deploy-manage/stack-settings.md#dynamic-cluster-setting). The object-count limits and authentication gates are operator-managed. The remaining settings require a node restart.
```

Author: Addressed across quackaplop's suggestion and https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/commit/48b0b73a4a5d1d2a5af7a829bbb3963c0582f9b2

> The data sources feature adds the following cluster settings. All are node-scoped. The file-discovery limits and `esql.source.cache.enabled` are dynamic. The object-count limits and authentication gates are operator-managed. The remaining settings require a node restart.

Reviewer 3: The operator-managed settings take effect without a restart — the current sentence buckets them with the restart-required group.

```suggestion
The object-count limits and authentication gates are operator-managed and take effect without a restart. The remaining settings require a node restart.
```

## Object limits

These settings cap the number of data sources and datasets a cluster can hold.

> | Setting | Default | Description |

Reviewer 2: Most settings I've seen are documented in a definition list type of format (defaults are just mentioned as part of the definition, and most definitions indicate if a setting is static or dynamic, [kind of like here](https://www.elastic.co/docs/reference/elasticsearch/configuration-reference/data-stream-lifecycle-settings)). 
Is there a reason why that format wasn't used here?

Author: a healthy mix of general ignorance + general incompetence 😄

Reviewer 2: > a healthy mix of general ignorance + general incompetence 😄

haha you've described me essentially //insert spiderman meme 😅

Author: can fix in follow-up :)

|---|---|---|
| `esql.data_sources.max_count` | 100 | Maximum number of data sources that can be defined. Range 0–1000. |
| `esql.datasets.max_count` | 1000 | Maximum number of datasets that can be defined. Range 0–10,000. |

## Request concurrency and throttling

These settings control how many concurrent requests each node sends to external storage and how long it retries throttled requests.

| Setting | Default | Description |
|---|---|---|
| `esql.external.max_concurrent_requests` | `allocated processors * 3`, minimum 16 and maximum 100 | Maximum concurrent cloud API requests per storage scheme, per node. `0` removes the limit. Range 0–500. |

> | `esql.external.throttle_max_retry_duration` | 30 | Maximum total time, in seconds, spent retrying throttled cloud API requests before failing the query. `0` removes the budget. Range 0–300 seconds. |

Reviewer 3: Undocumented concurrency setting that belongs in this table.

```suggestion
| `esql.external.throttle_max_retry_duration` | 30 | Maximum total time, in seconds, spent retrying throttled cloud API requests before failing the query. `0` removes the budget. Range 0–300 seconds. |
| `esql.external.max_concurrent_segmentators` | `0` | Maximum number of file segmentation tasks that run concurrently. `0` derives the value automatically. Range 0–4096. |
```

## Glob and file-discovery limits

> These settings limit how many files glob patterns can match before a query aborts.

Reviewer 3: Only `max_discovered_files` aborts; `max_glob_expansion` falls back to listing (the table row already says so).

```suggestion
These settings bound file discovery for glob patterns. Exceeding the file cap aborts the query; exceeding the brace-expansion cap falls back to listing the storage.
```

Author: perfect

| Setting | Default | Description |
|---|---|---|
| `esql.external.max_discovered_files` | 10,000 | Hard cap on files collected by glob expansion before the query aborts. Protects against degenerate globs. Range 1–1,000,000. Dynamic. |
| `esql.external.max_glob_expansion` | 100 | Cap on concrete paths generated by brace expansion before falling back to listing. Range 1–10,000. Dynamic. |

## Authentication

These settings control which authentication modes data sources can use.

| Setting | Default | Description |
|---|---|---|

> | `esql.datasource.managed_identity.enabled` | false | Enables `auth: "managed_identity"` (the node's own cloud identity via IMDS / metadata server). Operator-only. Intended for single-cloud, single-tenant deployments. Never enable in serverless or multi-tenant clusters. |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| `esql.datasource.managed_identity.enabled` | false | Enables `auth: "managed_identity"` (the node's own cloud identity through the instance metadata service (IMDS)). Operator-only. Intended for single-cloud, single-tenant deployments. Never enable in serverless or multi-tenant clusters. |
```

> | `esql.datasource.federated_identity.enabled` | false | Enables `auth: "federated_identity"` (OIDC-to-STS token exchange). Operator-only. Available on Elastic Cloud Hosted and serverless; not available on self-managed, ECE, or ECK. |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| `esql.datasource.federated_identity.enabled` | false | Enables `auth: "federated_identity"` (OIDC-to-STS token exchange). Operator-only. Available on {{ech}} and {{serverless-short}}; not available on self-managed, {{ece}}, or {{eck}}.|
```

> | `esql.datasource.federated_identity.enabled` | false | Enables `auth: "federated_identity"` (OIDC-to-STS token exchange). Operator-only. Available on {{ech}} and {{serverless-short}}; not available on self-managed, {{ece}}, or {{eck}}.|

Reviewer 3: The deprecated alias still functions as the fallback default for `managed_identity.enabled` — an operator migrating settings needs this.

```suggestion
| `esql.datasource.federated_identity.enabled` | false | Enables `auth: "federated_identity"` (OIDC-to-STS token exchange). Operator-only. Available on {{ech}} and {{serverless-short}}; not available on self-managed, {{ece}}, or {{eck}}.|

:::{note}
`esql.datasource.workload_identity.enabled` is a deprecated alias for `esql.datasource.managed_identity.enabled`. When the new setting is not set, the alias's value is used.
:::
```

Author: @quackaplop this is a brand new feature, do we really need to document deprecated aliases?

## Caching

These settings control the external-source cache, which stores inferred schemas and file listings.

| Setting | Default | Description |
|---|---|---|

> | `esql.source.cache.enabled` | true | Enables the external-source cache (inferred schemas and file listings). Dynamic. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `esql.source.cache.enabled` | true | Enables the external-source cache (inferred schemas and file listings). [Dynamic](docs-content://deploy-manage/stack-settings.md#dynamic-cluster-setting). |
```

Author: Resolved in https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/commit/48b0b73a4a5d1d2a5af7a829bbb3963c0582f9b2

| `esql.source.cache.size` | 0.4% of heap | Memory budget for the cache. Applied at node startup only. |

> | `esql.source.cache.schema.ttl` | 5m | How long an inferred schema is cached. Applied at node startup only. |

Reviewer 3: `schema.ttl` is a registered no-op — schemas invalidate by file identity, not a clock. Replacing the row with a deprecation note (drop it from the table).

```suggestion
:::{note}
`esql.source.cache.schema.ttl` is deprecated and has no effect. Schemas are invalidated when the underlying files change and by cache-size eviction, not by a TTL. The setting is accepted with a deprecation warning and ignored.
:::
```

Author: @quackaplop should we just not document it in that case?

| `esql.source.cache.listing.ttl` | 30s | How long a file-listing result is cached. Applied at node startup only. |

## Next steps

> - If queries are slow or reading more data than expected, refer to [how queries read external data](esql-data-federation-querying.md#how-queries-read-external-data) for guidance on column selection, partition pruning, and filter pushdown.

Reviewer 3: Broken anchor — the querying page heading is "How external data is read" (`#how-external-data-is-read`).

```suggestion
- If queries are slow or reading more data than expected, refer to [how external data is read](esql-data-federation-querying.md#how-external-data-is-read) for guidance on column selection, partition pruning, and filter pushdown.
```

## Caching

These settings control the external-source cache, which stores inferred schemas and file listings.

| Setting | Default | Description |
|---|---|---|
| `esql.source.cache.enabled` | true | Enables the external-source cache (inferred schemas and file listings). [Dynamic](docs-content://deploy-manage/stack-settings.md#dynamic-cluster-setting). |
| `esql.source.cache.size` | 0.4% of heap | Memory budget for the cache. Applied at node startup only. |
| `esql.source.cache.schema.ttl` | 5m | How long an inferred schema is cached. Applied at node startup only. |
| `esql.source.cache.listing.ttl` | 30s | How long a file-listing result is cached. Applied at node startup only. |

## Next steps

- If queries are slow or reading more data than expected, refer to [how external data is read](esql-data-federation-querying.md#how-external-data-is-read) for guidance on column selection, partition pruning, and filter pushdown.
- To enable federated identity or managed identity after setting the authentication gates on this page, refer to [connect external data sources](esql-data-federation-sources.md#authentication) for setup instructions.

> - For details on how credential encryption interacts with data source creation, refer to [manage credentials and privileges](esql-data-federation-security.md).

Reviewer: no need for next steps here. we could xref to guidance more granularly near the applicable settings

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/leemthompo/elasticsearch/commit/e53365c0ce241354f7fb53263c397601ee603e9e
